s3_scrubber/README.md, before:

# Neon S3 scrubber

This tool directly accesses the S3 buckets used by the Neon `pageserver`
and `safekeeper`, and does housekeeping such as cleaning up objects for tenants & timelines that no longer exist.

## Usage

### Generic Parameters

#### S3

Do `aws sso login --profile dev` to get the SSO access to the bucket to clean, get the SSO_ACCOUNT_ID for your profile (`cat ~/.aws/config` may help).

- `SSO_ACCOUNT_ID`: Credentials id to use for accessing S3 buckets
- `REGION`: A region where the bucket is located at.
- `BUCKET`: Bucket name

#### Console API

_This section is only relevant if using a command that requires access to Neon's internal control plane_

- `CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL`: The URL base to use for checking tenant/timeline for existence via the Cloud API.  e.g. `https://<admin host>/admin`

- `CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN`: The token to provide when querying the admin API. Get one on the corresponding console page, e.g. `https://<admin host>/app/settings/api-keys`

### Commands

#### `find-garbage`

Walk an S3 bucket and cross-reference the contents with the Console API to identify data for
tenants or timelines that should no longer exist.

- `--node-kind`: whether to inspect safekeeper or pageserver bucket prefix
- `--depth`: whether to only search for deletable tenants, or also search for
  deletable timelines within active tenants. Default: `tenant`
- `--output-path`: filename to write garbage list to.  Default `garbage.json`

This command outputs a JSON file describing tenants and timelines to remove, for subsequent
processing by the `purge-garbage` subcommand.

**Note that the garbage list format is not stable.  The output of `find-garbage` is only
  intended for use by the exact same version of the tool running `purge-garbage`**

Example:

`env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 REGION=eu-west-1 BUCKET=my-dev-bucket CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN=${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY} CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL=[url] cargo run --release -- find-garbage --node-kind=pageserver --depth=tenant --output-path=eu-west-1-garbage.json`

#### `purge-garbage`

Consume a garbage list from `find-garbage`, and delete the related objects in the S3 bucket.

- `--input-path`: filename to read garbage list from.  Default `garbage.json`.
- `--mode`: controls whether to purge only garbage that was specifically marked
            deleted in the control plane (`deletedonly`), or also to purge tenants/timelines
            that were not present in the control plane at all (`deletedandmissing`)

This command learns region/bucket details from the garbage file, so it is not necessary
to pass them on the command line

Example:

`env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 cargo run --release -- purge-garbage --node-kind=pageserver --depth=tenant --input-path=eu-west-1-garbage.json`

Add the `--delete` argument before `purge-garbage` to enable deletion.  This is intentionally
not provided inline in the example above to avoid accidents.  Without the `--delete` flag
the purge command will log all the keys that it would have deleted.

#### `scan-metadata`

Walk objects in a pageserver S3 bucket, and report statistics on the contents.

```
env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 REGION=eu-west-1 BUCKET=my-dev-bucket CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN=${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY} CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL=[url] cargo run --release -- scan-metadata

Timelines: 31106
With errors: 3
With warnings: 13942
With garbage: 0
Index versions: 2: 13942, 4: 17162
Timeline size bytes: min 22413312, 1% 52133887, 10% 56459263, 50% 101711871, 90% 191561727, 99% 280887295, max 167535558656
Layer size bytes: min 24576, 1% 36879, 10% 36879, 50% 61471, 90% 44695551, 99% 201457663, max 275324928
Timeline layer count: min 1, 1% 3, 10% 6, 50% 16, 90% 25, 99% 39, max 1053
```

## Cleaning up running pageservers

If S3 state is altered first manually, pageserver in-memory state will contain wrong data about S3 state, and tenants/timelines may get recreated on S3 (due to any layer upload due to compaction, pageserver restart, etc.). So before proceeding, for tenants/timelines which are already deleted in the console, we must remove these from pageservers.

First, we need to group pageservers by buckets, `https://<admin host>/admin/pageservers`` can be used for all env nodes, then `cat /storage/pageserver/data/pageserver.toml` on every node will show the bucket names and regions needed.

Per bucket, for every pageserver id related, find deleted tenants:

`curl -X POST "https://<admin_host>/admin/check_pageserver/{id}" -H "Accept: application/json" -H "Authorization: Bearer ${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY}" | jq`

use `?check_timelines=true` to find deleted timelines, but the check runs a separate query on every alive tenant, so that could be long and time out for big pageservers.

Note that some tenants/timelines could be marked as deleted in console, but console might continue querying the node later to fully remove the tenant/timeline: wait for some time before ensuring that the "extra" tenant/timeline is not going away by itself.

When all IDs are collected, manually go to every pageserver and detach/delete the tenant/timeline.
In future, the cleanup tool may access pageservers directly, but now it's only console and S3 it has access to.

Commit message:

s3_scrubber: implement scan-metadata for safekeepers.
It works by listing postgres table with memory dump of safekeepers state. s3
contents for each timeline are checked then against timeline_start_lsn and
backup_lsn. If inconsistency is found, before complaining timeline (branch) is
checked at control plane; it might have been deleted between the dump take and
s3 check.

s3_scrubber/README.md, after:

# Neon S3 scrubber

This tool directly accesses the S3 buckets used by the Neon `pageserver`
and `safekeeper`, and does housekeeping such as cleaning up objects for tenants & timelines that no longer exist.

## Usage

### Generic Parameters

#### S3

Do `aws sso login --profile dev` to get the SSO access to the bucket to clean, get the SSO_ACCOUNT_ID for your profile (`cat ~/.aws/config` may help).

- `SSO_ACCOUNT_ID`: Credentials id to use for accessing S3 buckets
- `REGION`: A region where the bucket is located at.
- `BUCKET`: Bucket name

#### Console API

_This section is only relevant if using a command that requires access to Neon's internal control plane_

- `CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL`: The URL base to use for checking tenant/timeline for existence via the Cloud API.  e.g. `https://<admin host>/admin`

- `CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN`: The token to provide when querying the admin API. Get one on the corresponding console page, e.g. `https://<admin host>/app/settings/api-keys`

### Commands

#### `find-garbage`

Walk an S3 bucket and cross-reference the contents with the Console API to identify data for
tenants or timelines that should no longer exist.

- `--node-kind`: whether to inspect safekeeper or pageserver bucket prefix
- `--depth`: whether to only search for deletable tenants, or also search for
  deletable timelines within active tenants. Default: `tenant`
- `--output-path`: filename to write garbage list to.  Default `garbage.json`

This command outputs a JSON file describing tenants and timelines to remove, for subsequent
processing by the `purge-garbage` subcommand.

**Note that the garbage list format is not stable.  The output of `find-garbage` is only
  intended for use by the exact same version of the tool running `purge-garbage`**

Example:

`env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 REGION=eu-west-1 BUCKET=my-dev-bucket CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN=${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY} CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL=[url] cargo run --release -- find-garbage --node-kind=pageserver --depth=tenant --output-path=eu-west-1-garbage.json`

#### `purge-garbage`

Consume a garbage list from `find-garbage`, and delete the related objects in the S3 bucket.

- `--input-path`: filename to read garbage list from.  Default `garbage.json`.
- `--mode`: controls whether to purge only garbage that was specifically marked
            deleted in the control plane (`deletedonly`), or also to purge tenants/timelines
            that were not present in the control plane at all (`deletedandmissing`)

This command learns region/bucket details from the garbage file, so it is not necessary
to pass them on the command line

Example:

`env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 cargo run --release -- purge-garbage --node-kind=pageserver --depth=tenant --input-path=eu-west-1-garbage.json`

Add the `--delete` argument before `purge-garbage` to enable deletion.  This is intentionally
not provided inline in the example above to avoid accidents.  Without the `--delete` flag
the purge command will log all the keys that it would have deleted.

#### `scan-metadata`

Walk objects in a pageserver or safekeeper S3 bucket, and report statistics on the contents and checking consistency.
Errors are logged to stderr and summary to stdout.

For pageserver:
```
env SSO_ACCOUNT_ID=123456 REGION=eu-west-1 BUCKET=my-dev-bucket CLOUD_ADMIN_API_TOKEN=${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY} CLOUD_ADMIN_API_URL=[url] cargo run --release -- scan-metadata

Timelines: 31106
With errors: 3
With warnings: 13942
With garbage: 0
Index versions: 2: 13942, 4: 17162
Timeline size bytes: min 22413312, 1% 52133887, 10% 56459263, 50% 101711871, 90% 191561727, 99% 280887295, max 167535558656
Layer size bytes: min 24576, 1% 36879, 10% 36879, 50% 61471, 90% 44695551, 99% 201457663, max 275324928
Timeline layer count: min 1, 1% 3, 10% 6, 50% 16, 90% 25, 99% 39, max 1053
```

For safekeepers, dump_db_connstr and dump_db_table must be
specified; they should point to table with debug dump which will be used
to list timelines and find their backup and start LSNs.

## Cleaning up running pageservers

If S3 state is altered first manually, pageserver in-memory state will contain wrong data about S3 state, and tenants/timelines may get recreated on S3 (due to any layer upload due to compaction, pageserver restart, etc.). So before proceeding, for tenants/timelines which are already deleted in the console, we must remove these from pageservers.

First, we need to group pageservers by buckets, `https://<admin host>/admin/pageservers`` can be used for all env nodes, then `cat /storage/pageserver/data/pageserver.toml` on every node will show the bucket names and regions needed.

Per bucket, for every pageserver id related, find deleted tenants:

`curl -X POST "https://<admin_host>/admin/check_pageserver/{id}" -H "Accept: application/json" -H "Authorization: Bearer ${NEON_CLOUD_ADMIN_API_STAGING_KEY}" | jq`

use `?check_timelines=true` to find deleted timelines, but the check runs a separate query on every alive tenant, so that could be long and time out for big pageservers.

Note that some tenants/timelines could be marked as deleted in console, but console might continue querying the node later to fully remove the tenant/timeline: wait for some time before ensuring that the "extra" tenant/timeline is not going away by itself.

When all IDs are collected, manually go to every pageserver and detach/delete the tenant/timeline.
In future, the cleanup tool may access pageservers directly, but now it's only console and S3 it has access to.
